---
title: "Programming Languages: Rust (Updating)"
categories:
  - System
  - PL
---

A glimpse of a modern, systems programming language.

References: The Book, https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/title-page.html

## Ownership

Ownership is Rust's solution to memory management.

Recall that how variables(especially those located on the heap) are managed by compiled languages like C and interpreted languages such as Python. The C programming language takes nearly no control over the allocation and deallocation of heap memory. Programmers are responsible for doing so correctly, which is hard. Many memory problems related to poor management have been encountered all the time:

* memory leakage due to missing deallocation.
* Freeing the same address twice.
* Dangling pointers referencing to nowhere.
* Shallow copy v.s. deep copy.

The contrary strategy is adopted by languages like Python. Python uses reference counting(not for PyPy) and garbage collector to ensure memory safety. Usually programmers need not to care about the memory space that underlies their code. Here are some descriptions on Python's strategy of memory management:

* memory layout: https://realpython.com/python-memory-management/
* garbage collection: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/garbage-collection-python/

Rust, as a compiled language, requires programmers to be more specific on data creation and assignment. As a result, no explicit new/free is needed and many run-time errors can now be detected and prevented at compile time.

Variables in Rust are immutable by default: you have to add 'mut' to declare them as mutable. You are also prohibited to create immutable reference to a mutable variable. Then there are two types of variables as for memory location: those that are fully on stack and those have parts on the heap. For the first kind(e.g. most atomic types), variables are still usable after an assignment. This property doesn't hold for the other kind(e.g. strings), due to the moved ownership.

```Rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;

println!("x = {}, y = {}", x, y);

let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1;

println!("{}, world!", s1);
```

First, once a variable is created, it claims its ownership to the contained value. Ownership of that value is transfered once you assign it to another variable. If you want to reuse the variable after an assignment, you can either call .clone() method to conduct a deep copy, or you may want to borrow this ownership by reference. The first kind of data mentioned above, often refered as stack-only data, hold the Copy trait that keeps their ownership after assignment, as brand new values are created then given to the assigned variables. This is the default behavior of Rust because memory operations on stack is determined and fast. The second type, on the other hand, often holds the Drop trait that will free up the occupied heap space once variables go out of scope.

## Ownership and Concurrency

Except for memory safety, the ownership system of Rust elegantly solves many potential hazards when introducing concurrency.

For instance, the Rust compiler checks that when a mutable reference is active, no other references are. This behavior is similar to that of an exclusive lock.

(Updating)

## Zero-cost Abstraction

Rust implements abstraction features with no runtime panelty: you cannot do better by hand-writing the concrete version. For example, the virtual function and (underlying) virtual table supports dynamic binding in C++ with no cost. The "zero-cost" here means you can't do any better than a search for function pointer. Similar to C++, this feature ensures extreme performance of programs written in Rust. For example, if you compile a Rust program with generics, the Rust compiler will fully instantiate the abstraction into code with concrete types. So there is really no difference with writing it for a particular type. 